I was told about Lina obliquely, in hushed shadowy fragments, by my then-boyfriend David. They had separated after six years together, and she moved back to her home in the Middle East. They had a fraught relationship afterwards in which they sent vicious missives one moment and desperate avowals of love the next. The first I knew of her was when she added me on Facebook and immediately mailed me to say it was an accident and must have been because her fingers slipped. Slipped from WHAT I wondered, slipped from their previous activity of lightly fondling my profile pictures? I had only known her as a name from his past until then, but suddenly she was a flesh and blood, slightly unhinged woman. When she first discovered I was seeing him she had looked me up and began a long and extensive trawl through my social media accounts. She emailed him throughout each day to comment on her discoveries, and these he fed back to me. We would sit on my bed discussing. Lina had become obsessed by me, and he was obsessed by her because he was still in love with her.

“She said you looked fat in this picture,” he would say, scrolling down, “but sexy in this one.”

I grabbed the computer from him to take a closer look. Lina said I was childish, and not as pretty as her, but she also said she thought I was a good writer. Lina said I was overweight, and most likely not a good lover, because I was so young. Lina checked my Twitter account daily and emailed him to ask what the jokes meant because she didn’t understand the internet properly.

Each time a new observation of Lina’s was reported back to me, I would go back and look at the post in question, analysing an innocent photograph or link to slow meaningless death. I felt alive under her vivid, hateful gaze. I started to think of her when I did anything at all on the internet. When I wore a coquettish outfit and took a selfie, I thought “I hope you like this one.”

I wrote poems about him on my blog, which she would read and report back on; “When she says “the bird of your back,” does she mean your tattoo of a bird, or is it a metaphor?”

And so I wrote even prettier poems, exaggerating even further the depth of our relationship, just so she could see them, and know that he was mine. I pretended even harder to be a flippant Holly Golightly character who didn’t care what she thought, all the while gradually altering my entire online life to be a performance for her. I photographed our Valentine’s Dinners, our Sunday morning eggs, our beach walks with the dog, using her as the constant filter. Lina was the distant curator of the life I desperately wanted with him, one which never existed.